Now we're going to parent these bones in such a way that we can control and rotate the foot and achieve
that foot roll functionality.
So first of all let's begin with the left side here and let's come in and choose that foot.
I K Dot l It's choose this here we've got the foot l let me click it again and there we go.
There it is foot Ike dot L and then I'll press shift and click and select this TOE ROLL.
So keep in mind we're still in edit mode here select the foot I K and then the TOE ROLL.
Now we can press control P to parent the foot I K to the TOE ROLL AND THEN CLICK keep offset because
we want to keep these in the same location in the same position as they are now so we click that next
we want to make the heel roll bone apparent of the TOE ROLL so we'll click the toe shift select the
heel and same thing control P and keep offset.
Now we want to make the heel and the foot roll bone.
Children of this foot control so the foot control is basically going to be the parent of all of these.
So let's select the heel shift select the foot roll and then shift click the foot control bone and then
control P and once again keep offset.
Let's take a look at what that did for us.
I'm going to come back over here to post mode now let's select this foot control bone and we better
change our median point back to or our pivot point back to median.
And now if we hit G and move this around you can see that foot control bone moves everything.
In addition it also moves or it also controls the rotation of everything as well so that as I said is
the parent of all of these bones.
In addition we should be able to take this bone here and roll it in the x and you can see how we can
roll it forward on that toe joint there and then I'll press Alt R and then here for this joint we can
roll this back.
Now you can see how it's going to kind of pivot on that heel.
It looks like we're going to need to do a little weight painting back here.
You can see how that heel is coming off the ground there.
But that's why I wanted to wait until we were all done with the foot roll rig before we go in and do
any more weight painting.
All right I'm gonna press Alt are and let's go back to edit mode and do the same thing for the other
side.
So over here Let's select that foot.
I k bone here shift select the toe bone and press control P and keep offset.
Now we select the toe and then the heel control P keep offset and then we do the heel and the foot roll
then the foot control and control P and keep offset.
Now let's go test it out.
So we go back to pose mode.
This bone right here should be able to move everything and rotate everything.
Yeah I'm in the press Alt R and all G and that'll take it back and then this bone here we should be
able to roll forward on that toe bone.
Yeah.
And this one we should be able to roll back at the heel.
Sure enough.
Okay so we're making progress.
That's good.
Now what ultimately needs to happen is this bone here is going to be what controls the roll forward
and back when we roll it up it'll roll onto the toe and when we roll it down it will roll back onto
the heel it are to clear that.
So let's go ahead and work on this to set that up.
To do that we're going to use some constraints.
So I'm gonna come over here to the toe roll first of all let's set this up.
And if we come over here to the bone constraints panel let's add a copy rotation constraint right here
and of course we want the target to be the armature and we want the bone that we're getting the rotation
from.
To be that foot roll here.
So it's like this.
Scroll down a bit.
And here's that foot roll dot l.
So let's select that.
Now you can see it changed just a little bit here what we need to do is come in and change our space
from world to local here and here and also we need to uncheck the z and y axes so let's see what we've
done here.
Let's select that foot roll bone.
Let's turn it up and look at that that turned that bone up as well so we can rotate on the toe.
But now we don't want it to go all the way like this.
We need to kind of limit the rotation so we don't get crazy with it here.
So I mean for us old are and if we select that toe bone again let's add a limit rotation constraint
as well.
Let's limited in the X let's limited by what you think 30 degrees I'm going to try 30.
I think that'll work pretty well and local space.
All right.
So now if I select this bone here and I rotate it even though I keep going it will quit at 30 percent.
The that's what we want.
All right.
Ah now let's do a similar thing for the heel back here for this one once again.
Let's also add a copy rotation constraint right here our target will be the armature.
Let's turn off Zee and why switch to local space and we'll select that foot roll dot L. bone as well.
Right here we go.
Now for this one we want to activate this to roll up when this bone rolls down.
So we want to invert this.
Just click invert their nav we select this bone and we roll it back like this.
It works pretty well.
That that looks good.
But if we roll it forward it kind of goes all crazy and that's because we need to limit that rotation
the way we did for the toe roll.
So let me press Alt R and let's go back to the heel roll.
Now let's add a limit rotation constraint here and then let's choose limit in the X will also put 30
degrees in here and we'll change this from world space to local.
There we go.
Now let's test it.
Let's go over to the foot roll.
Let's roll this back.
Yeah.
That works pretty well.
And let's roll it forward.
Yep.
The toe turns there the heel turns there and once again the mesh is pulling here because we have to
do a little bit of weight painting here and fix that.
So that's fine.
All are to clear that.
All right.
Let's do that same thing on the other side.
So let's select that toe roll bone let's add a copy rotation constraint turnoff y and z local space
and let's do the armature as the target and the bone as the foot roll.
Are.
Now let's add a limit rotation constraint we'll call it 30 degrees local space and let's give it a test.
We select this.
Roll it forward good.
All right.
That's working pretty well.
Now the heel once again a copy rotation turnoff y and z local space armature is the target foot roll
as the bone right here.
And remember for this one we want to invert it and also let's add that limit rotation constraint.
There we go.
And let's give this 30 degrees and change from world to local.
All right.
So now let's test this when we roll it back.
Good.
We roll it forward.
That works as well.
OK so in the next video what let's do is work on keeping these toes flat on the ground as we turn up
on that joint.
And also I'd like to add some controls for the knees as well so we can point the knees where we want
them to go.
So if say this foot was turning like this we could then take that knee and point it in the same direction.
All right.
Ah.
And we'll work on that next.